.TH lpjs-nodes 1

.SH NAME    \" Section header
.PP

lpjs nodes \- Show node status on an LPJS cluster

\" Convention:
\" Underline anything that is typed verbatim - commands, etc.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.nf 
.na 
lpjs nodes [new-state node [node ...]]
.ad
.fi

\" Optional sections
.SH "DESCRIPTION"

The basic form,
.B "lpjs nodes",
shows the current node state, resources, and specs for each node.
Standard format includes basic hardware and operating
system specs and current usage of cores and memory.

It can also be used by the administrator to set a new node state for
one or more nodes, by supplying a new state and a list of nodes
(or "all") as arguments.

New states may be one of the following:

.TP
\fBpaused\fR
The node is closed to new jobs.  Existing jobs will continue to run.

.TP
\fBupdating\fR
The same as "paused", but used by SPCM (Simple, Portable Cluster Manager)
to keep track of nodes that are paused for routine, automated package
and OS updates.

.TP
\fBup\fR
Resume scheduling jobs on a node that is paused or updating.

.SH EXAMPLES

.nf
.na
lpjs nodes
Hostname             State    Procs Used PhysMiB    Used OS        Arch     
barracuda.acadix.biz down         4    0   16350       0 FreeBSD   amd64    
tarpon.acadix.biz    up           8    0    8192       0 Darwin    arm64    
herring.acadix.biz   up           4    0    1000       0 FreeBSD   arm64    
netbsd9.acadix.biz   up           2    0    4095       0 NetBSD    amd64    
alma8.acadix.biz     up           2    0    3653       0 RHEL      x86_64   

Total                up          16    0   16940       0 -         -        
Total                down         4    0   16350       0 -         -        
.ad
.fi

.nf
.na
lpjs nodes paused barracuda.acadix.biz
lpjs nodes updating all
lpjs nodes up barracuda.acadix.biz
.ad
.fi

.SH FILES
.nf
.na
%%PREFIX%%/etc/lpjs/config
.ad
.fi

.SH "SEE ALSO"
lpjs-jobs(1), lpjs-submit(1)

.SH AUTHOR
.nf
.na
J. Bacon
