<!-- This text is shared with RCUG: Keep them in sync. -->
<chapter>
    <title>File Sharing</title>
    
    <para>
    Clusters normally have one or more file servers, so that jobs
    can run in a directory that is directly accessible from all nodes.
    This is the ideal situation, as input files are directly
    available to jobs, and output files from jobs can be written
    to their final location without needing to transfer them.
    </para>
    
    <note>
    <para>
    At present, it appears to be impractical to use macOS for
    compute nodes with data on a file server.
    macOS has a security feature that prevents programs from
    accessing most directories unless the user explicitly
    grants permission via the graphical interface.  In order for
    LPJS to access file servers as required for normal operation,
    the program <command>lpjs_compd</command> must be granted full disk
    access via System Settings, Privacy and Security.  Otherwise,
    you may see "operation not permitted" errors in the log when
    trying to access NFS shares.
    </para>
    
    <para>
    The major problem is that this is not a one-time setting.  Each
    time LPJS is updated, full disk access is revoked, and the
    user must enable it via the graphical interface again.
    </para>
    </note>
    
    <para>
    Grids normally do not have file servers.  In this case, it will
    be necessary for all nodes to have the ability to pull files
    from and push files to <emphasis>somewhere</emphasis>.  Typically,
    this somewhere would be the submit node, or a server accessible
    for file transfers from the submit node and all compute nodes.
    </para>
    
    <para>
    LPJS does not provide file
    transfer tools.  There are numerous highly-evolved, general-purpose
    file transfer tools already available, so it is left to the
    systems manager and user to decide which one(s) to use.
    We recommend using <command>rsync</command> if possible, as it
    is highly portable and reliable, and minimizes the amount of
    data transferred when repeating a transfer.
    </para>
    
    <note>
    All compute nodes must be able to perform a passwordless
    file transfers to the designated server, i.e. pulling files
    to, or pushing files from a compute node does not prompt
    the user for a password.
    This is generally accomplished by installing ssh
    keys on the submit node, which can be done by running
    <command>auto-ssh-authorize submit-host</command> from every
    compute node, as every user who will run jobs.
    </note>
    
    <para>
    The <command>lpjs submit</command> command creates a marker file
    in the working directory on the submit host, named
    ".lpjs-submit-host-name-shared-fs-marker" (replace "submit-host-name"
    with the FQDN of your submit node).  If this file is not accessible
    to the compute node, then LPJS will take the necessary steps
    to create the temporary working directory and transfer it back
    to the submit node after the script terminates.
    </para>
    
    <para>
    If the working directory (the directory from which the job is
    submitted on the submit node) is not accessible to the compute
    nodes (e.g. using NFS), then the user's script is
    responsible for downloading any required input files.
    Below is an example from  <filename>Test/fastq-trim.lpjs</filename>
    in the LPJS Github repository.
    </para>
    
    <note>
    Note that we used the <option>--copy-links</option> option with
    rsync, so that it copies files pointed to by symbolic links,
    rather than just recreating the symbolic link on the compute node.
    You must understand each situation and decide whether this is
    necessary.
    </note>
    
    <programlisting language="sh">
# Marker file is created by "lpjs submit" so we can detect shared filesystems.
# If this file does not exist on the compute nodes, then the compute nodes
# must pull (download) the input files.
marker=.lpjs-$LPJS_SUBMIT_HOST-shared-fs-marker
if [ ! -e $marker ]; then
    printf "$marker does not exist.  Using rsync to transfer files.\n"
    set -x
    printf "Fetching $LPJS_SUBMIT_HOST:$LPJS_WORKING_DIRECTORY/$infile\n"
    # Use --copy-links if a file on the submit node might be a symbolic
    # link pointing to something that it not also being pulled here
    rsync --copy-links ${LPJS_SUBMIT_HOST}:$LPJS_WORKING_DIRECTORY/$infile .
    set +x
else
    printf "$marker found.  No need to transfer files.\n"
fi
    </programlisting>
    
    <para>
    LPJS will, by default, transfer the contents of the temporary working
    directory back to the working directory on the submit node, using
    <command>rsync -av temp-working-dir/ submit-host:working-dir</command>.
    The "working-dir" above is the directory from which the job was
    submitted, and "temp-working-dir" is a job-specific temporary directory
    created by LPJS on the compute node.  Following this transfer,
    the working directory on the submit node should contain the same
    output file as it would using a shared filesystem.
    Users can override the transfer command.
    command.  See the Research Computing User Guide for details.
    </para>
    
    <programlisting language="sh">
# If we downloaded the input file, remove it now to avoid wasting time
# transferring it back.  By default, LPJS transfers the entire temporary
# working directory to the submit node using rsync.
if [ ! -e $marker ]; then
    rm -f $infile
fi
    </programlisting>
</chapter>

